CS 103: Mathematical Foundations of Computing
Problem Set #4
[Caleb Liu, Justin Shen]
February 10, 2023
Due Friday, October 28 at 2:30 pm Pacific
Sets can be written as {1,2,3}or as{n∈N|n≥137}.
Multicharacter superscripts and subscripts need braces: x137x+42orx137.
1[Caleb Liu, Justin Shen] Problem Set 4 February 10, 2023
Problem One: Independent and Dominating Sets
i.
{b, g, d}
{a, c, g}
ii.
Theorem: LetG= (V, E )be an arbitrary graph with the following property: every node in G is adjacent
to at least one other node in G. Prove that if Iis an independent set in G, then V−Iis a dominating set in G.
Proof: Consider an arbitrary graph G= (V, E )with the following property: every node in G is
adjacent to at least one other node in G. Pick an arbitrary node x∈Gsuch that x /∈(V−I). There must
be some node ywhere {x, y} ∈E. We want to show that y∈(V−I). Because x /∈(V−I)andx∈V, we
know that x∈I. Because x, y} ∈E, we know that ycannot be in I. Therefore, the ymust be in V−I,
which is what we wanted to prove.
iii.
I={b, g, d}
J={d, h, f, a }
iv.
Theorem: Prove that if Iis a maximal independent set in G= (V, E ), then Iis a dominating set of G.
Proof: Consider a graph, G= (V, E )and a maximal independent set in G, I. For the sake of con-
tradiction assume that Iis not a dominating set of G. Pick an arbitrary node x∈I. Because Iis not
a dominating set of G, we know there exists a node y /∈I, such that {x, y}/∈E. Now consider the set,
I′=I∪ {y}. Because ydoes not form any edges with any arbitrary xin I,I′is independent. Moreover, as
I⊆I′andI̸=I′, we know that Iis a strict subset of I′. However, this is impossible, as we stated earlier
thatIis a maximal independent set. Therefore, our previous assumption must have been false.
CS 103: Mathematical Foundations of Computing — Fall 2022 2[Caleb Liu, Justin Shen] Problem Set 4 February 10, 2023
Problem Two: Friends, Strangers, Enemies, and Hats
i.
Theorem: In a party with 36 attendees, each person wears a hat of seven possible colors: aureolin, bole,
chartreuse, drab, ecru, fulvous, and gamboge. Prove that you can always find three mutual friends all
wearing the same color hat or three mutual strangers all wearing the same color hat.
Proof: Given that there are 36 attendees and 7 possible color choices, by the pigeonhole princi-
ple, we have that there must be at least36
7
of people wearing the same colored hat. Let’s consider three
of the pairs. Because, by the Theorem on Friends and Strangers, we know that the pairs can either friends
or strangers, we use the pigeonhole principle to claim that any person will have at least6
2
friends or
strangers. Without loss of generality, assume that a person, xhas three friends: a,b, and c. Ifaandb
to be friends, bandcto be friends, or aandcto be friends, then one of those edges plus the two edges
connecting back to node xwould form three mutual friends. Otherwise, aandbare strangers, bandcare
strangers, and aandcare strangers, so a,b, and cwould be mutual strangers. Overall, this gives that you
can always find three mutual friends all wearing the same color hat or three mutual strangers all wearing
the same color hat, as required.
CS 103: Mathematical Foundations of Computing — Fall 2022 3[Caleb Liu, Justin Shen] Problem Set 4 February 10, 2023
ii.
Theorem: There’s a party with 17 attendees. For each pair of people at the party, either those people
are strangers, those people are friends, or those people are enemies. Prove that you can always find three
mutual friends, or three mutual strangers, or three mutual enemies.
Proof: By the pigeonhole principle, we know for any single person, x, there are at least16
3
friends, strangers, or enemies. Without loss of generality, assume that xhas16
3
, or 6 friends. Now pick
any person, y, such that that xis friends with y. We proceed with two possible cases:
Case 1: If yis friends with anyone aside from x, three mutual friends are formed, as required.
Case 2: If yis not friends with anyone other than x, by the pigeonhole principle, we know that y
has at least5
2
strangers, or enemies. Without loss of generality, assume that yis strangers with5
2
, or 3,
people. Consider a person zsuch that xis friends with zandyis strangers with z. We proceed with three
cases, and for simplicity, only regarding the three people that xis friend with and yis strangers with:
Case 2a: If zis friends with anyone besides x, three mutual friends are formed, as required.
Case 2b: If zis strangers with anyone that yis strangers with, three mutual strangers are formed,
as required.
Case 2c: Otherwise, zis enemies with the other two people. We know there are two people aand
b, such that aandbare enemies with z, strangers with y, and friends with x. No matter what relationship
ahas with b, three mutual friends, strangers, or enemies are formed, as required.
CS 103: Mathematical Foundations of Computing — Fall 2022 4[Caleb Liu, Justin Shen] Problem Set 4 February 10, 2023
Problem Three: Iterated Injections
i.
Theorem: Prove that the sequence must contain at least one duplicate value
Proof: Assume for the sake of contradiction that the sequence f0(a), f1(a), f2(a), ..., fk(a),did
not have at least one duplciate value. Because fis an injection, and fis applied ktimes, there must
have been k+ 1unique values x∈Ain the sequence, as f0(a) =a. However, this is impossible because
|A|=k. Therefore, we have reached a contradiction, so our original assumption must have been wrong.
The sequence must contain at least one duplicate value.
ii.
Theorem: Using your result from part (i), prove that fn+1(a) =a.
Proof: Suppose for the sake of contradiction that fn+1(a)̸=a. Since fis an injection, there
must exist some value xin the sequence such that fn+1(a) =x. Since the sequence thus far consists of
all unique values, we know there exists some k in range 0< k≤nsuch that fk(a) =x. However, this is
impossible because fis an injection. We have reached a contradiction so our original assumption must have
been wrong. Thus, fn+1(a) =a.
iii.
Theorem: Prove that fis bijective
Proof: Assume f:A→Ais a well-defined injection from a finite set to itself. We want to show
thatfis also a bijection. To do so, we will show that fis surjective.
Pick any arbitrary a∈A. From our above proofs, we know that there exists some n∈Nwhere fn+1(a) =a.
Thus, for any arbitrary a∈A, there exists an x∈A(namely fn(a)) such that f(x) =a. Asawas selected
arbitrarily, we’ve shown that fis surjective. Therefore, because fis injective and surjective, we’ve shown
that it is also bijection.
CS 103: Mathematical Foundations of Computing — Fall 2022 5[Caleb Liu, Justin Shen] Problem Set 4 February 10, 2023
Optional Fun Problem: Forced Triangles
Write your answer to the Optional Fun Problem here.
CS 103: Mathematical Foundations of Computing — Fall 2022 6