Gupta, Liu, Shen
1
Deep Reinforcement Learning for Statistical Arbitrage
Akash Gupta, Caleb Liu, Justin Shen
1.0 Introduction:
1.1 Computational Finance:
The concept of applying rudimentary statistical and computational tools to financial
markets has been around for numerous decades. More recently , with the development of
advanced statistical and artificial intelligence methods such as deep reinforcement learning, there
has been renewed interest in exploring the applications of computational finance.
1.2 Statistical Arbitrage & Pairs T rading:
Despite high levels of volatility and unpredictability in financial markets, one of the
oldest and most supported theories in finance is the idea that all financial instruments (i.e.
equities, options, etc.) are mean-reverting, meaning they will return to an average baseline, given
enough time. One mathematical trading strategy that takes advantage of this theory is statistical
arbitrage, which leverages statistical models to gauge when financial instruments stray away
from their average behavior; oftentimes observed in the form of improper pricing. More
specifically , one technique within statistical arbitrage is pairs trading. Pairs trading is a financial
trading strategy that involves strategically buying and selling two historically correlated stocks.
The crux of the strategy is to profit from the diver gence of the two prices, protecting oneself
against market risk and profiting from market volatility . For example if Apple and Microsoft
have stock prices that historically move in conjunction, they could be candidates for pairs
trading. If there is a brief period of time where Apple goes up and Microsoft goes down, one
would buy Microsoft and sell/short Apple, with the anticipation that they will conver ge at some
point in the future when the markets revert back to their normal behavior , allowing the investor
to profit on both ends.
1.3 Problem Statement:
Given the unpredictability correlation between the two prices, an extension of the
stochastic nature of financial markets, using statistical, mathematical, and computational
techniques to implement pairs trading is well-suited for a decision making under uncertainty
problem. It requires making sequential decisions and predictions in a situation containing a highGupta, Liu, Shen
2
degree of uncertainty , while trying to maximize a reward (i.e. profits). Therefore, we propose the
use of a deep reinforcement learning agent in order to attempt to maximize the potential profits
observed in statistical arbitrage scenarios. We will run statistical simulations  (i.e. correlation and
cointegration testing) of dozens of stocks in order to find a few pairs trading candidates that we
will train our deep reinforcement learning agent on.