Language Documentation 
and Description 
ISSN 2756-1224  
___________________________________________ 
This article appe ars in: Language Documentation and Description, vol 
14. Editors: Wesley Y. Leon ard & Haley De Korne
Resistin g rhetoric s of language 
endangerment: Reclamation through 
Indigenou s language survivance  
JENNY L. DAVIS 
Cite thi s article : Jenny L. Davis (2017). Resisting rhetori cs of language 
endangerment : Reclamation through Indigenou s language survivance . 
In Wesley Y. Leon ard & Haley De Korne (eds) Language Documentation 
and Description, vol 14 . London : EL Publishing. pp. 37-58 
Link to thi s article : http://www.elpublishing.org/PID/ 151 
This electroni c version first published : Septembe r 2017 
__________________________________________________ 
This article is published under a Creative Commons 
License CC -BY-NC (Attribution -NonCommercial). Th e 
licence permits users to use, reproduce, disseminate 
or display the article provided that the author is attributed as the 
original creator and that the reuse is restricted to non -commercial 
purposes i.e. research or educational use. See 
http://creativecom mons.org/licenses/by -nc/4.0/  
______________________________________________________  
EL Publishing  
For more EL Publishing articles and services:  
Website:  http://www.elpublishing.org  
Terms of use:  http://www.elpublishing.org/terms  
Submissions:  http://www.e lpublishing.org/submissions  

 
Davis , Jenny L . 2017. Resisting rhetorics of language endangerment: Reclamation through Indigenous 
language survivance . In Wesley Y. Leonard & Haley De Korne (eds.) Language Documentation and 
Description , vol 14, 37-58. London: EL Publishing.  
 Resisting rhetorics of language endangerment: 
Reclamation  through Indigenous language s urvivance  
Jenny L. Davis  
University of Illinois, Urbana -Champaign  
Abstract  
Hill (2002) (and the robust discussions it inspired) demonstrated the 
importa nce of looking carefully at the rhetorics used by academics when 
discussing Indigenous and endangered languages . Fifteen years later this still 
remains a subject of concern . In this article I examine how three related 
strategies are increasingly employed i n both academic and public domains: 
Linguistic  extraction  is the process of discussing languages and language 
reclamation  movements removed from the personal lives, communicative 
practices, and embodied experiences in which they inherently are embedded, 
while the erasure of colonial agency  minim ises the historical and ongoing 
causes of language endangerment and dormancy, sometimes to the extent of 
misattributing agency for such realities onto Indigenous communities 
themselves. Lasting  is a discursive proces s through which Indigenous 
populations are framed as ‘vanishing’ , first by defining Indians based on a 
singular characteristic, and then lamenting the passing of the ‘last’ Indians 
assumed to have had that single defining characteristic (O’Brien 2010). I 
explore the im plications of these rhetorics for both endangered language 
movements and the communities at the center of those movements , with a 
particular emphasis on the discursive tactics that resist these strategies which 
are utilised by Indigenous commu nity members and language activists.  
 
Keywords:  language endangerment, language reclamation,  Indigenous, 
rhetoric, l anguage survivance  
 
 Jenny L. Davis  38 
1. Language  endangerment rhetoric s1 
From BBC News  and the Guardian , the New York Times  and the Huffington 
Post to Vodaf one promotional materials, endangered languages are an 
increasingly pervasive topic in the media. The rhetorical strategies deployed 
are intend ed to raise public awareness about language endangerment. These 
strategies are the focus of this paper, which dra ws on a corpus of articles 
and online posts from the past decade published in established, English -
language newspapers, media outlets, and magazines with wide, multi -
national circulation in both digital and print formats, and increased 
dissemination throug h social media platforms such as Twitter, Reddit, and 
Facebook. The rhetorics discussed here come from examples of media 
coverage of language endangerment with the highest circulation, identified 
by the number of reader subscriptions for print media, and the number of 
accesse s, shares, ‘likes’, and reposts for digital formats. I focus on media 
discussions of language endangerment, because, as Nancy Rivenburgh 
(2011:704)  notes in her examination of how English -language media frame 
the causes and implications  of language endangerment : ‘For better or worse, 
people rely heavily on media to understand how these global phenomena 
touch their lives’.  
Specifically, I examine rhetorics surrounding language endangerment and 
their implications for Indigenous communities  in North America and for many 
endangered language communities more broadly, where they create a status 
quo that Meek (2011 :55) argues ‘ constantly presents barriers, challenges, or 
constraints that need to be destroyed, unpacked, and  deconstructed, or just  
changed .’ In doing so, I join a growing number of scholars who examine 
closely the rhetorics surrounding Indigenous languages and their impact on 
public and community conceptual isation , language reclamation efforts, and 
even language policy in order to be gin to unpack the se discourses  (Hill 2002; 
Leonard 2008, 2017; Meek 2010, 2011; Perley 2012).  
Hill (2002)  asked academics writi ng about language endangerment ‘ who is 
listening, and what do they hear ?’ as a means of interrogating the underlying 
assumptions and entailments of language advocacy rhetoric in order  to ensure 
that we do  not ‘distress and alienate’  the communities we advocate for and 
with ( Hill 2002: 120). Fifteen  years later, we have several answers. As this 
article will show, the world was listeni ng. It responded through the creation of 
new policies and in some cases a n ideological shift away from shaming and 
                                                           
 
 1 I would like to thank the editors Wesley Y. Leonard and Haley De Korne for their 
insight and astute feedback, and the anonymous reviewers for the ir feedback. Thanks 
also to my colleagues in the Soc -Cultural/Linguistic Anthropology reading g roup at 
UIUC and to Jenanne Ferguson for their comments on various stages of this article.  Resisting rhetorics of language endangerment  39 
devaluing language diversity to a valor isation  of those same languages .2 At 
the same time, the rhetorics identified by Hill now extend from a cademic 
papers and grant proposals into mainstream media discourses about language 
endangerment and the affected communities. The three themes Hill identified 
are: ‘universal ownership ’, ‘hyperbolic valor isation’ , and ‘enumeration ’. 
Universal ownership , as Hill defines it, is the positioning of endangered 
languages as belonging to everyone, especially the target au diences for 
language advocacy, ‘ who must be convinced that they  “posses s” this 
particular form of wealth and are somehow responsible for it ’ (Hill 2002: 121). 
A related process  is hyperbolic valor isation  through which languages are 
framed as ‘resources’ that have ‘value’ , utilizing economic metaphors such as 
languages being ‘treasures’ or ‘priceless’ . Finally, enumeration  involves the 
‘essential ization and individual ization  of a language as a sort of unit’  (Hill 
2002: 127), and heavy reliance on statistical representations to describe 
endangered languages at a global scale.  Critically, Hill does not argu e that all 
uses of these themes are bad, but rat her that researchers should consider their 
rhetorical strategies carefully, including alternative frameworks of 
representation such as a rhetoric of human rights.  
Building on Hill’s framework, I examine three additional related 
strategies that are increasi ngly deployed in both academic and public 
domains, and which are evidenced in the corpus of popular and scholarly 
texts reviewed in this paper: linguistic extraction, erasure or misattribution 
of colonial agency, and ‘lasting’. Linguistic  extraction is the  process of 
discussing languages and language reclamation movements extracted from 
the personal lives, communicative practices, and embodied experiences in 
which they are inherently embedded . The  erasure of colonial agency  
minimises historical and ongoing causes of language endangerment and 
dormancy, sometimes to the extent of misattributing agency onto Indigenous 
communities themselves. Lasting  draws on O’Brien’s (2010) identification 
of the discursive and semiotic process through which Indigenous 
populati ons are framed as ‘vanishing’ , and applies it specifically to practices  
within the context of Indigenous and endangered languages. It is replicated 
in discussions about ‘last speakers’ and over -emphasis on declining speaker 
populations (Muehlmann 2012) rat her than new speakers and positive 
language reclamation effects. By examining these widely circulating 
rhetorics, within studies of broader colonial framings of Indigenous people 
within Native American and Indigenous studies, I will demonstrate how 
such rh etorics both draw on existing trends within settler societies and 
continue to influence them. Then, I will ‘listen’ to a different body of 
                                                           
 
 2 This valor isation  is nearly always at the level of ‘languages’ and often does not apply 
at the level of dialects and other language variation.  Jenny L. Davis  40 
rhetoric – produced by members of endangered language communities and 
in ethnographic accounts of language reclamatio n – in search of discursive 
strategies of linguistic survivance that resist colonial tropes and neo -colonial 
desires of language -as-resource extraction.  
1.1. Linguistic extraction  
The first trend that emerges in media coverage of language endangerment is 
linguistic extraction , i.e. defining, analy sing, and representing languages and 
the people connected to them separate ly from the complex socio -historical, 
political, and deeply personal contexts in which they actually occur. 
Linguistic extraction, then, ren ders languages into extractable objects that can 
be collected, preserved, util ised, and even admired. Critically, linguistic 
extraction is not solely the collection of endangered and Indigenous languages 
in ways that often render them inaccessible to their  communities, but also the 
presentation of languages as objects, or data, without their complex and varied 
human contexts. In his analysis of both popular and scholarly literature about 
endangered languages , Moore (2006 :297) asserts  that it ‘summons its re aders 
to an encounter with these languages as monuments in a sculpture garden of 
human cognitive achievements, objects of wonder and appreciation ’. Like the 
natural resources and ‘treasures’ with which they have been frequently 
aligned , Indigenous and enda ngered languages – as a whole or in their 
component  pieces  – are frequently util ised in processes labeled ‘mining’ and 
‘harvesting’ by researchers  within this extractive framework. This literal and 
metaphorical extraction from context is itself a colonial enterprise and often a 
cornerstone of Western science  – one that removes people from homelands, 
loots objects from graves in the name of science and education, and 
disassociates products from those who labour to produce them. In other 
words, it celebrates the empire  in empirical . Extraction is the foundation of 
enumeration  identified by Hill, where qualities of languages or people are 
counted and then detached from the ir larger dynamics . 
Linguistic extraction also happens in valuing linguistic data over the  
speakers from whom it comes,  and the communities and contexts in which it 
is produced. Take , for example , this representative excerpt from a National 
Geographic  article on  ‘Languages racing to extinction in 5 global “hotspots ”’ 
(Lovegren 2007 :1) setting u p the backdrop for the story’s focus on language 
endangerment:  
In the last 500 years, an estimated half of the world’s languages, 
from Etruscan to Tasmanian, have become extinct. But researchers 
say the languages of the world are  now vanishing faster than ever 
in recorded history. More than 500 languages may be s poken by 
fewer than ten people.  Resisting rhetorics of language endangerment  41 
In this article, which had over 8,000 ‘likes’ and around 2,000 ‘shares’ on 
Facebook alone, decontextual ised enumeration allows for the available  
numbers to appear ran domi sed, as though in a world with thousands of 
languages, all are equally at risk of endangerment ; or, in a community with 
500 speakers and a population of 50 ,000, any individual out of 100 might be a 
speaker. In reality, these  numbers are embedded in particular (but inter related) 
geographic, socio -economic, familial, and historical contexts. Their rhetorical 
presupposition reveals another level of extraction frequently util ised in media 
discussion of language endangerment: the erasure of factors that shap e 
language shift. In Lovegren (2007)  no rationale is given for why the last 500 
years might be a significantly different moment in language transmission, 
even though it coincides with the period of European and American 
colonialism and global isation.  
A 2014 ‘op-doc’ piece ‘Who speaks Wukchumni?’  in the New York Times  
has a similar representation of language endangerment in its introduction to a 
short documentary about a fluent speaker who wrote the first comprehensive  
dictionary of the language (Vaughan -Lee 2014):  
Throughout the Unites States, many Native Americans languages 
are struggling to survive. According to Unesco, more than 130 of 
these languages are currently at risk, with 74 languages considered 
‘critically endangere d.’ The se languages preserve pri celess cultural 
heritage, and some hold unexpected value – nuances in these 
languages convey unparalleled knowledge of the natural world. 
Many of these at -risk languages are found in my home state of 
California. Now for some, onl y a few fluent speakers rem ain. 
 
The short article then describes the documentary’s primary subject, Marie 
Wilcox, without a single mention of why so many Native American 
languages are ‘struggling to survive’. This form of linguistic extraction 
erases the very causes, historical and  ongoing, of language endangerment. In 
the context of seemingly transparent numbers outlining the ‘crisis’ or 
‘epidemic’ of language endangerment and a sudden, if de -historicised 
valuing of Indigenous languages by a global public, readers are left with the  
looming question – why?  
The long view of human language shows us that language shift and 
change – especially shifts into language dormancy – do not simply occur 
outside of sociopolitical factors; thus, we know that languages are dynamic, 
and inherently in  motion through intergenerational transmission that moves 
them forward through generations and spaces. Borrowing conceptually from 
Newton’s first law of motion, we can posit that languages tend to remain in 
motion – being transmitted to subsequent generati ons – unless an external 
force is applied to them. Omitting those forces from discussions of language 
endangerment leaves out a critical piece of the equation and contributes to Jenny L. Davis  42 
the larger pattern of erasure originating in settler -colonialism – this 
omissi on is particularly problematic when such forces are still actively at 
work. Here, linguistic extraction is the gateway rhetorical process to the 
erasure of colonial agency and the misattribution of agency onto endangered 
language communities for their own linguistic demise, discussed in the next 
section.  
1.2. Erasure of colonial a gency  
Such erasure or deflection of colonial agency is not limited to linguistic 
endangerment. As Deer (2015:x) notes in her analysis of sexual violence in 
Native Am erican communit ies within the United States , the term ‘epidemic’ is 
often applied to describe the egregious numbers of violent sexual assaults 
against Indian women : 
Using the word epidemic deflects responsibility because it fails to 
acknowledge the agency of perpetrators  and those who allow the 
problem to continue. The word also utterly fails to account for the 
crisis’s roots in history and law. Using the word epidemic to talk 
about violence in Indian country is to depoliticize rape. It is a 
fundamental misstatement of th e problem.  
   
Here, Deer argues that the dominant discourses surrounding the pervasive 
sexual violence against Native American women, particularly framing it as 
an ‘epidemic’, erases the agent(s) and causes(s) of those realities; to present 
violence as nat urally occurring not only ‘depoliticises’ the problem, but also 
absolves culpable parties of any responsibility. Similarly, the erasure of the 
sociohistorical dynamics which shape every aspect of language 
endangerment – especially as they relate to settler  colonial nation states and 
their overt and covert policies aimed at destroying language transmission – 
then, is, to quote Deer, ‘a fundamental misstatement of the problem’.  
While the role, and agency, of colonial powers is erased, the assignment of 
agency  is not absent from media discussion of language endangerment. In 
fact, the blame for the plight of Indigenous languages is often ascribed to the 
communities themselves, or individuals within them. This is perhaps most 
visible in the metaphor of ‘language suicide ’, which posits that a group that 
loses its language may do so by choice  (Denison 1977) . However, as 
Crawford (1995:24) notes, the ‘suicide’ frame of language death ‘ explains 
little about the social forces underlying such choices. Whether deliberate  or 
not, the notion of language suicide fos ters a victim -blaming strategy’.  Media 
representations frequently use language denoting  that full (de -historic ised) 
agency regarding the future of languages lies with endangered language 
communities. The title of the previously -cited National Geographic  2007 
article, ‘Languages racing to extinction’, brings to mind a competition for fun Resisting rhetorics of language endangerment  43 
or sport toward language attrition. L inguists working on language 
documentation are quoted describing the context  in which languag e shift 
occurs (emphasis mine):  
 
[Gregory] Anderson, of the Enduring Voices Project, agreed that social 
pressures play a prominent role... ‘Language endangerment happens when a 
community decides  that their language is somehow  a social or economic  
impedimen t,’ he said.  
 
[K. David] Harrison said children are often the ones who decide  to effectively 
abandon  a native tongue. ‘ Children are little  barometers of social prestige,’  
he said.  
 
‘[I]n most cases, language s die a slow death, as people simply abandon  their 
native tongues when they become surrounded by people speaking a more 
common langua ge.’ 
 
In these statements, communities ‘decide’ their languages are ‘ somehow  ... 
imped iments’, causing them to ‘simply abandon’  them. Language shift and 
language acquisitio n are represented as fully agentive  choices  linked onl y to 
‘social prestige’ and ‘social pressures’ or some kind of unknowable 
impediment, and, while the inclusion of ‘social pressures’ hints at external 
factors, the final and repeated emphasis places agen cy on the community. Th e 
placement  of agency on children here is particularly problematic when we 
consider that children are often the primary target of linguistic violence and 
regimes of cultural genocide ( e.g., boarding schools, child welfare act, 
remova l policies3), while simultaneously having the least power within the 
sociocultural language dynamics in which they are represented as ‘simply’ 
making such choices.  
Children are  not the only people within endangered language communities 
singled out  as the a gents of language attrition in the media. In communities 
where endangered languages are spoken fluently by few people, particular 
individuals are often identified as the cause of the decline of language 
                                                           
 
 3 For more informati on about Native American boarding schools in the United States , 
see the overview  in Archuleta et al. (2000 ), and accounts of specific instit utes in Cobb 
(2000), Lomawaima (1994),  Sakiestewa Gilbert (2010 ), and Whalen (2016 ). For an in -
depth examination of residential school experiences in Canada, see Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission (2015 ). For an introduction to the Child Welfare Act 
across multiple colonial contexts, see Briggs & Dubinsky (2013 ) and the American 
Indian Quarterly  special issue 37(2) on Native Adoption in Canada, the United States, 
New Zealand, and Australia.  Jenny L. Davis  44 
transmission. Perhaps the m ost widely discussed examp le is the (partially 
fictional ised) story of two speakers , Manuel Segovia and Isidro Vel ázquez , of 
the Indigenous language Ayapaneco in Mexico. A 2011 Huffington Post  
article about the now infamous feud between two men presents  the situation 
as follows (em phasis mine) : 
Though the language has been spoken in what is now Mexico for 
centuries, there are only two people left who can speak Ayapaneco 
fluently. Like so many other indigenous languag es, it’s at risk of 
extinction – even more so because , as the Guard ian reports, the 
last two speakers are refusing to talk to each other . 
 
This widely circulated and re -worked story  was shared from the Huffington 
Post webpage over 3,500 times , and als o became the focal point of a 
campaign and ad vertisement  series by the British telecommunications 
company, Vodafone . The two fluent speakers of Ayapaneco are repeatedly 
identified as the reason Ayapaneco w ill not be spoken by future generations 
using a  rhetoric that parallels the plac ement  of all agency in language 
endangermen t onto Indigenous communities (see Suslak 2011 for a response 
and thorough contextual isation  of the Ayapaneco media coverage and its 
consequences) . Phrasing like ‘ it’s at risk of extinction  ... because the last two 
speakers are refusing to talk to ea ch oth er’ directly links language dormancy – 
here problematically called ‘extinction ’ (discussed further in section 1.3, 
below) – to the very late -in-life actions of two individuals whose personal 
feelings toward each other are of no consequence to a world despe rate to 
extract valuable knowledge hidden within the treasure chest of Indigenous  
languages. From this external evaluative perspective, Indigenous people owe 
it to the rest of the world not only to provide aspects of their culture, life, and 
knowledge of t he world to outsiders on demand, but also to be friends with 
anyone else involved in accommodating those demands.  
The author of a 2014 BBC article took a similar approach to the title of her 
article about the language dynamics of an Indigenous community in  
California: ‘The people who want  their language to disappear’ (emphasis 
mine). In it, she describes a small Native American community who has 
decided that language documentation by outsiders simply to preserve aspects 
of the language for scientific goals did not fit with their understanding of how 
languages should exist. After only three days visiting the community, which 
includes her relatives, the author, who is from Wales, concludes her 
discussion with: ‘In the age of mass information, the choice of the  Maidu 
shows that without trust and engagement, valuable knowledge and 
understanding  can be lost forever ’ (emphasis mine). Here, the ‘choice’ of 
the Maidu is combined with an additional extraction in terms of language 
endangerment and loss disconnected fro m the conditions of the Maidu 
community. Such articles never lament the decline or demise of Indigenous Resisting rhetorics of language endangerment  45 
sovereignty or autonomy, the loss of political, economic, or geographic 
stability and power, or even the strong correspondence of language attrition 
with the actual necropolitical4 dynamics in marginalised communities. In fact, 
as I discuss in the next section, Indigenous (language) death is only 
noteworthy when it is the ‘last’.  
1.3. Lasting  
Marie Wilcox, Manuel Segov ia, and Isidro Vel ázquez are all part  of an 
increasingly publically circulating discourse about ‘last speakers’ of 
Indigenous and endangered languages. Of the rhetorical strategies in news 
media discussed in this paper, ‘lasting’ may be the most prevalent. Historian 
and Native studies scholar  O’Brien (2010) coins the term  lasting  for the 
discursive process through which Indigenous populations are framed within 
local New England histories as ‘vanishing’ by defining Indians bas ed on a 
singular characteristic – full blood quantum in the case of n ineteenth century 
New Englan d. Las ting, then is a process of what Irvine & Gal (2000) call 
iconisation  (rhemat isation ) and erasure. First, specific individuals or 
characteristics are made iconically representative of larger wholes – be they 
groups, languag es, or cultures. Erasure happens  in two concomitant processes: 
(1) other characteristics or people that could be representative of the larger 
whole are erased; and (2) the larger whole is er ased through the countdown, or 
‘lasting’,  of those iconic few. Las ting is, then, a specific configuration of 
hyperbolic valorisation and enumeration . 
The reporting of last speakers of endangered languages is a centuries -old 
genre of counting down to the inevitable end of Indigenous people, assuming 
an unavoidable loss of  culture, space, and eventually, existence. Consider  the 
first words of Thurman ’s (2015) New Yorker  article, ‘A loss for w ords:  Can a 
dying language be saved?’ (emphasis mine) : 
It is a singular fate to be the last of one’s kind . That is the fate of 
the men  and women, near ly all of them elderly, who are – like 
Marie Wilcox, of Californ ia; Gyani Maiya Sen, of Nepal; Verdena 
Parker, of Oregon; and C harlie Mungulda, of Australia – the las t 
known speakers of a language.  
                                                           
 
 4 Mbembe (2003:14) defines necropolitics as ‘the relationship between sovereignt y and 
power over life and death ’. In other words, necropolitical dynamics are those in which 
a soverei gn – often colonial – power is capable not only of deciding when and how a 
subject dies, but also includes the right to enslave others, the right to impose social or 
civil death, and other forms of cultural and political violence.  Jenny L. Davis  46 
While each individual represent s a particu lar type of speaker within much 
larger commun ities, they are presented as ‘ the last of [their] kind’ . Such 
rhetoric directly reflects  17th century des criptions of the ‘last of’  tribes in New 
England, as well as popular accounts such as The Last of the Mohi cans 
(Cooper 1888) , The Last of the Dogmen  (Hershey et al. 1995) , and Ishi the  
Last Yahi: A Documentary History  (Heizer & Kroeber 1979),  where specific 
individuals (historical or fictional) were held up as the last of their 
community, thereby marking the e xtinction of whole  groups of Indians , and 
all Native Americans more generally. This technique is used to make 
spectacularly famous (and famous spectacles of) individuals, li ke Ishi, deemed 
to be the ‘last ’. Thus,  National Geographic  hosts a w ebpage that in vites 
readers to ‘ See and Hear La st Speakers of Dying Languages’,  Wikipedia  lists 
59 individuals from around the globe in a ‘List of last known speakers of 
languages ’, and, as mentioned above, various online news outlets circulated  a 
story throughout 2011 and subsequent years  titled: ‘Last two speakers of 
dying language r efuse  to talk to each other’.  
There are three elements of the lasting of endangered languages that are of 
particular importance. Firstly, those identified as the ‘last’  speakers of 
language s are only very specifically understood as ‘speakers’ in a narrowly 
defined way: native speakers  (those who learned the language from 
birth/childhood); monolingual  (speaking only the lang uage of interest); fully 
fluent  (those able to participate in any and  all domains of language use and 
communication in the language); mentally sound ; and with a particular 
heritage  (ethnic and/or cultural origins within the communities associated 
with the language). However, these are not the same criteria ap plied to the 
classification of ‘speakers’  of non -endangered languages, and such a narrow 
restriction of who gets counted as a speaker, or a holder of linguistic expertise 
and knowledge, erases those who fit one or more, but not all of the listed 
qualities. As Leonard & Haynes (2010:279) point out, researcher 
determinations of who is, and is not a speaker ‘without having come to 
understand what being a speaker means within the cultural context extends the 
historical colonialist practice of imposing Western ways of knowing without 
acknowledging that other ways of knowing exist’. Furthermore, narrow, 
linguistically -derived definitions of speakerhood effectively erase bilingual 
speakers and learners, and exclude potential members of multilingual 
communities (De Korne 2017).  
The second element of concern is the direct connection between lasting  
and the already critiqued discourses of some endangered and Indigenous 
languages as dead. As enumerations go, ‘last’ is a superlative, and it evokes to 
the same level of irreversible fina lity as ‘dead’ (see King & Hermes 2014 ; 
Leonard 2008 ; Meek 2011 ; Perley 2012). In nearly all classification systems 
for language vitality and endangerment, the end point is extinction – 
borrowing from ecological and biological discourses. The UNESCO 2003 
Language Vitality and Endangerment Report , for example, divides language Resisting rhetorics of language endangerment  47 
endangerment into a six degree scale, with ‘Safe (5)’ being the most robust 
with no threat of endangerment, and ‘Extinction (0)’ being the least, defined 
as: ‘There is no one who can s peak or remember the language’ (UNESCO 
2003:8). This discourse of extinction has been challenged by groups whose 
languages were previously classified as extinct, such as Myaamia and 
Wampanoag, but have since re -gained speakers. As Miami linguist and 
langua ge activist Wesley Y. Leonard (2011:137) points out, the problem with 
the category of extinct, is that ‘extinct means forever’. Once classified as 
extinct, as the M yaamia language was, it is extremely difficult for existing 
language practices to be recogni sed as legitimate – or even existing at all. In 
contrast, language activists call for the term ‘dormant’ or ‘sleeping’ to be used 
for languages that do not currently have living speakers – a semantic frame 
that assumes such a status may only be temporary. Perley (2012:145) suggests 
shifting the metaphor from dead  to dormant  or sleeping  is powerful enough to 
‘provide new hope for sleeping languages, as community members conceive 
emergent vitalities for their heritage languages as they awaken them’ . I 
believe  that same consideration to the metaphorical framing of ‘last’ may 
prove equally powerful, and the converse  to be equally detrimental.  
The third element of these rhetorical strategies to consider is that they 
contribute to ‘depictions of [I]ndigenous langu ages as shifting toward 
nonexistence in direct correspondence to shifts across generations of 
speakers’, where ‘younger generations are depicted as failing to acquire a 
language, in this case their ancestral or heritage tongue’ (Meek 2011:51). As 
such, the se rhetorics contribute to what Meek identifies within media 
depictions of Indigenous language dynamics as the ‘doom -and-gloom’ 
narrative of Indigenous languages as doomed, their communities having 
‘failed’ to maintain them (ibid:53). Such tropes leave end angered language 
communities in seemingly impossible positions. On the one hand, bilingual 
and multilingual speakers and contexts are usually rendered uncounted, the 
‘Invisible Man’ (Wells 1924) in the village of language reclamation. And, 
when new speaker s emerge against great odds in communities already slated 
as dead, their last speaker gone, those communities must then argue against 
the archive of coverage to declare their language ‘un -dead’, reminiscent of the 
pivotal scene in James Whales’ 1931 film a daptation of Mary Shelley’s 
Frankenstein , during which Dr. Frankenstein declares repeatedly, ‘It’s alive!’ 
Much like Dr. Frankenstein, Indigenous language communities with re -
awakened languages are then tasked with convincing the town mob, or readers 
of ne ws media, of the realness of their accomplishment’s existence – often 
with the same effect. Much like the Invisible Man or Frankenstein’s 
reanimated human, re -awakened languages – with their (often bilingual) new 
speakers and regular use – cannot completel y escape the pervasive 
expectation of the Vanishing Indian (language) trope, and are perceived as 
unnatural at best, and, at worst, monstrous.  Jenny L. Davis  48 
2. Indigenous language s urvivance  
These complex and ever -changing language and identity dynamics highlight 
curren t tensions in efforts to draw attention to barriers to Indigenous language 
use and transmission. They also demonstrate the importance of engaging with 
endangered language rhetorics in ways that do not replicate pre -existing 
discourses that may ultimately m aintain settler colonial desires to quantify, 
regulate, and erase Indigenous communities. It should be noted that the 
rhetorical strategies of ‘linguistic extraction’, ‘the erasure of colonial agency’, 
and ‘lasting ’ can probably all be found to some extent  within Indigenous and 
endangered language communities themselves. However, they are not the only 
ways in which such communities understand, or represent, language 
endangerment an d language reclamation efforts.  
In this section, I ‘listen’ to an alternat ive body of rhetoric produced within 
endangered language communities, by Indigenous scholars, and by 
ethnographers of Indigenous and endangered language contexts , and discuss 
what it might offer scholars and language activists. The examples in this section 
provide direct alternatives to the common rhetorics discussed above: they are 
organised around each of the strategies they counter . Firstly, the centering of 
languages within social contexts, individual lives, and embodied experiences 
provides counter -strate gies to linguistic extraction . Second ly, the explicit 
discussion of the ethno -national histories and political realities that have shaped 
and continue to shape language realities works against the erasure of colonial 
agency. Finally, by including a wide ra nge of speakers and potential language 
users (including bilingual speakers, language learners, and others supporting 
language reclamation) , definitions of language contexts and communities that 
emphasise what Vizenor (1999) terms ‘survivance’5 are used in favor of 
narratives of lasting. However, these counter -narratives and framings, and 
resistive strategies often occur concomitantly; in other words, more than one 
trope may be countered within the same statement, practice, or policy. 
Alternatives to models favoring linguistic extraction also usually emphasise not 
only the historical and social causes of language endangerment, but also the 
very personal impacts it has on Indigenous and endangered language 
communities left out of extractive representations of language dynamics. When 
discussing language endangerment, the majority of endangered language 
communities with which I have had contact are quick to situate their languages 
and linguistic realities within historical, social, and geopolitical contexts; they 
point out the role of colonial governments in the historical and current 
precarious states of their languages . They also  include a wide variety of relevant 
participants in those language dynamics  beyond just first -language speakers.  
                                                           
 
 5 A portmanteau of ‘survi val’ and ‘resistance’, survivance  emphasizes moving beyond 
narratives of Indigenous tragedy and dominance.  Resisting rhetorics of language endangerment  49 
Indigenous communities  and scholars working in language documentation 
and reclamation regularly emphas ise the importance of contextuali sing 
endangered languages, or the descri ption , in detail, of the robust geographic, 
linguistic, spiritual , and social dynamics of languages, of  language activists, 
and of language reclamation projects . For example, Leonard ( 2017 ) addresses 
the contextualizing power of using community definitions of critical terms by 
showing how accepted definitions of ‘language’ within academia (and the 
interconn ected areas of dictionaries, etc .) can differ dramatically from the 
definitions provided by Indigenous people who work closely with  
language(s). Here he questions assumptions in Linguistics that separate the 
body from the mind, stemming from the field’s or igin in the Western 
philosophical canon where language is a product and function of the mind 
(and therefore not the body). The Indigenous people he interviews do not 
share this definition of language , and, critically , do not necessarily have one 
definition . Instead, they frame language as a basket, a life narrative, and even 
the key to the afterlife. Such Indigenous definitions are critical to broader 
discussions of language, particularly when the languages under consideration  
are from Indigenous communitie s. Far too often, they involve discussing , and, 
more egregiously , evaluating language projects and the communities in which 
they occur without consideration of the lived realities of those in the middle of 
those projects. This practice leads to arm -chair t heori sing of what could, 
would, and should be done in ways that often forget that participants are 
parents, partners, community organizers, and so on , who must carve out time 
for, and physically get to, language classes and programs.  Perspectives which 
take this personal reality into account, such as Hornberger ’s (2017) in-depth 
portr aits of three Indigenous language activists, help to contextual ise language 
reclamation beyond the dominant trend of focusing on analy sing grammatical 
features or enumerating s peakers.  
The rhetorical strategies found in the work of authors in this volume are 
echoed by other members of Indigenous and endangered language 
communities who offer repeated calls to situate language as personal – as 
located within the Indigenous se lf. In this area, I  am reminded of the piece by 
Mojave poet, Natalie Diaz  (2014), entitled If what I mean is hummingbird, if 
what I mean is fall into my mouth  which begins:  
 
In Mojave, the words we use to describe our emotions are literally 
dragged  through our hearts before we sp eak them – they begin with 
the prefix wa-, a shortened form of iiwa, our word for heart and 
chest. So we will never lightly  ask, How are you?  Instead, we ask 
very directly about your heart. We have  one way to say that our 
hearts are good , and as you might imagine if you’ve  ever read a 
history book or lived in this world, we have many ways to say our  
hearts are hurting.  Jenny L. Davis  50 
The government came to us first in the form of the Cavalry, then 
the military  fort (which is why we are called Fort Mojav e), and 
finally the boarding school.  The government didn’t sim ply ‘teach’  
us English in those b oarding schools – they systematically and 
methodically took our Mojave language. They took all  the words 
we had. They even took our names. Especially, they took our 
words  for the ways we love – in silencing us, they silenced the 
ways we told each other about our hearts.  
 
Contextual isation here takes the next step of  position ing language within 
bodies and lived experiences  from which they cannot be extracted . In 
exploring how certain feelings are expressed in Mojave, Diaz describes 
multiple impactful experiences the community had with the U .S. military and 
government policies and their very personal and linguistic effects. This 
contextual isation  resonates with momen ts in my own research. For example, 
during an interview with a first language speaker of Chickasaw  in 2009, I 
asked the question ‘ what was it like to  grow up speaking the language?’  His 
response was to shift in his chair and pull up his shirt, sh owing me a  three -
inch scar , now six  decades old , that was the  result of a physical attack by three  
non-Native older boys who heard him speaking to his sister in their language. 
For this speaker and others, violence and struggle are not metaphors in 
understanding lan guage shift and reclamation, and the body is  not only a 
machine that produc es and perceives semiotic codes; rather, it is the literal 
battleground on which conflicts are waged. Language, for Natal ie Diaz and so 
many others, is ‘pulled through the heart’ . 
Furthermore, as broader ideologies shift increasingly toward valuing 
Indigenous languages, many Indigenous people articulate the necessity of 
ensuring that the historical dynamics that associated speaking those same 
languages with shame, fear, and pain are not forgotten. They provide rhetorical 
strategies that explicitly locate language endange rment within colonial 
processes  – often to deflect rhetorics of blame directed at individuals , 
generations, or even entire communities framed as agentively causing the  
endangered status of their own languages or negative ideologies associated with 
them. De Korne (2017) demonstrates how Zapotec language teachers in Mexico 
counter the disjunctures that emerge from the extraction of languages both from 
other languages and from the historical and current contexts in which languages 
overlap. Much like courses that teach students that English is a Germanic 
language with a direct (and singular) lineage from Middle and Old English, 
rather than an almost textbook example of a cre ole formed through the merging 
of grammatical structure from Germanic and vocabulary from French, Latin, 
Greek, and a plethora of Indigenous languages, ‘true’ languages in Mexico are 
imagined as distinct and easily isolated from each other, and Indigenous 
languages are quickly dismissed as ‘inauthentic’ for containing loan words or 
anything that might be considered ‘code -mixing’. Of course , these purist Resisting rhetorics of language endangerment  51 
language ideologies are never equilaterally applied: Zapotec is deauthenticated 
for its contact with othe r colonial languages, while Spanish, with which it is 
usually contrasted, is authenticated as a ‘true language’ despite its own partial 
origins in Arabic, Greek, and – yes – Indigenous languages , including Zapotec. 
Instead , language activists not only teac h Indigenous languages, but also make 
visible the disjunctures created through colonial agendas through which no 
actual speakers of Indigenous languages approximate the imagined ‘pure’ 
language (because these languages have never occurred in the monolingua l 
vacuum in which they are imagined).  
Locating language endangerment within colonial processes may also take 
the form of new genres of stories such as those connected to schooling 
experiences. Within my own research, I repeatedly encountered narratives 
such as the one below, from a Chickasaw woman  whose family was involved 
in language reclamation across multiple generations – from parents who are 
fluent speakers, to a daughter and grandchildren currently learning the 
language. During an interview in Oklahom a in 2011, she responded to a broad 
question about her own experience with the Chickasaw language by providing 
the experiences of her mother and older generations in the community : 
My mom didn’ t ... you’ve probably heard this story d own the line 
before  ... Mom didn’ t want us learning Chickasaw. She didn’ t want 
us to learn the language. She spoke only Chickasaw when she went 
to school, and she went through a lot of embarrassment of , uh, 
people talking about her, making fun of her, and she learned 
English on her own in school. And it was really hard on her. So she 
didn’t, Mom didn’ t want us goin’ through the embarrassment of 
what she went through  – she said it was a White man’s world and 
you need to le arn the ways of the White man. That’ s why she never 
encoura ged us to learn at all. 
 
As she notes in her comment ‘ you’ve probably heard t his story down the line 
before’,  narratives like hers are a very typical means of remembering the 
context of Indigenous language realities for previous generations as well as 
highlighting the very real circumstances that contextual ise language shift. 
Similar narratives emerged in the recently completed Truth and 
Reconciliation Report , which details the impact of Canada’s residential school 
era on Indigenous communities . The report (Vol. 5 :104-105) notes : 
While the children taken to the schools tried to retain as much of 
their languages and cultures as they could, the multigenerational 
battle waged against them was too hard to resist. While initially 
Survivors could return to communi ties where their languages and 
cultures were still alive and vibrant, with each successive 
generation of Survivors, there was a greater weakening of Jenny L. Davis  52 
community cultural and linguistic strength. More often than not, 
the schools prevailed. Aboriginal students  were forced to abandon 
their languages and cultural practices. They became alienated from 
their families, their communities, and ultimately from themselves. 
This damage was passed down through generations, as former 
students found themselves unable or unw illing to teach their own 
children Aboriginal la nguages and cultural ways.  
 
Clearly , these stories of language shift offer an important counter -narrative to 
discourses that suggest that members of e ndangered language communities 
‘simply abandon’  their lang uages, or that language shift and endangerment 
happen  randomly throughout the world.  
Community efforts and narratives also offer counter -strategies to the 
dominant trend of lasting, which assumes an inevitable ‘count -down’ and end 
to endangered and Indigen ous language speakers (Muehlma nn 2012) and 
limited definitions of both ‘speaker’ and the contexts of language use and 
reclamation.  From Wendat (Lukaniec 2015) to Miami ( Baldwin et al. 2013 ; 
Leonard 2008) to Wampanoag ( baird 2013), researchers and Indigenou s 
communities are de monstrating that languages can ‘ awaken ’ – even after 
periods of dormancy. These examples also demonstrate that individuals, 
groups, and communities can ‘save’ languages, not just lose them as popular 
media representation suggests. They also provide examples where 
declarations of language ‘extinction’ or ‘dormancy’ prove overly enthusiastic, 
such as those that declared Plains Indian Sign Language long -dormant, when 
in fact it was – and still is – known and used within a variety of communi ties 
through out the United States and Canada  (Farnell 1995).  We are increasingly 
offered evidence that endangered language communities can, and do, pull 
together maintained community knowledge with language documentation 
resources and comparative linguisti c analysis of related languages to create 
new generations of speakers and new contexts of language use. This includes 
genres  – old and new – within Indigenous and endangered language 
communities often erased by dominant rhetorics of language endangerment 
focused exclusively on quantifications o f ‘speakers’ and ‘languages ’. The 
contributors to Kroskrity (2012), for example, each highlight the role of 
narrative and lesser -discussed genres like poetry in the language maintenance 
and reclamation efforts of Indigenous communities.  
In these and other contexts, ethnographic examinations of language 
reclamation efforts have demonstrated that community language dynamics 
should include all participants: speakers, as well as the people actively 
learning, those supporti ve of language reclamation  efforts, and even those 
directly connected to speakers and learners  – a group I call ‘language 
affiliates ’ (Davis 2016). Ferguso n (2010) also observed that language learning 
and speaking dynamics were reinforced and maintained by  both teachers and 
students during her ethnography of elementary scho ol Dän K'è language Resisting rhetorics of language endangerment  53 
classes in Whitehorse, Yukon. H ermes & Engman (2017) found positive 
effects from a similarly broad grouping of critical participants in their five-
year Anishinaabemowi n documentation and description project, which 
included the (sometimes overlapping) categories of community members, 
researchers, a non -Indigenous linguist, and Indigenous and non -Indigenous 
second language learners. Equally important in this context is th e 
demonstration that the identity categories of community members and 
language learners may, through experiences in language reclamation projects, 
become language transcribers, analysts, and stronger language experts over 
the course of months and years . In these contexts, language reclamation is 
being done by groups of people, sometimes by entire communities, rather than 
solely by the individual monolingual or fluent speakers represented in most 
speaker counts.  
3. Conclusion  
The questions driving conversati ons in mainstream media around language 
endangerment are predominantly:  
 
 Why have languages become endangered?  
 Why has intergenerational language transmission dwindled and 
stopped?  
 Why are Indigenous people switching from heritage language(s) to 
more globa l languages?  
 
In fact, this rhetorical framing is itself telling. It positions language loss as the 
exception, the marked outcome in the total possible realities. As linguistic 
anthropologist Shulist  (2016:94) notes , ‘if the prediction of widespread 
langua ge “extinction”  ... evokes a view of one possible future, then efforts 
aimed at fighting against this prediction involve imagining, and working to 
create, an alternative one’ . But what does imagining alternative futures look 
like? What happens when, knowin g the extensive history of linguistic 
violence faced by Indigenous peoples globally, we expect  that any Indigenous 
language is at risk? If we draw on the concept of Native survivance , defined 
by Vizenor (2008:11) as ‘an active resistance and repudiation of  dominance, 
obtrusive themes of tragedy, nihilism, and victimry’ when discussing 
Indigenous peoples , particularly in the telling of stories  about language 
endangerment6, here are the  kinds of questions we might ask: 
 
                                                           
 
 6 See Nevins (2013:1 ) for an excellent example.  Jenny L. Davis  54 
 How is it even possible that Indigenous  and endangered languages 
have been maintained  for as long as they have been?  
 What socio -cultural, historical, and political factors have 
facilitated language maintenance and use?  
 What do examples of language maintenance under such extreme 
conditions teach  us about potential strategies for continued 
language reclamation in our communities?  
 What incredible levels of dedication and persistence are 
demonstrated by individuals, families, and communities engaging 
in language reclamation?  
Overwhelmingly discourse s of endangered and Indigenous language failure 
(Meek 2011) are largely attributable  to what questions are asked, how, and by 
whom. The differences between the proposed questions above and the 
questions being answered in dominant rhetorics about endangered  languages 
represent what Meek  (2010:50)  calls ‘sociolinguistic disjunctures’, or ‘points 
of discontinuity or contradiction, moments where practices and ideas about 
language diverge ’. In these cases, the disjunctures exist between members of 
Indigenous com munities, their languages, and broader institutional ised 
ideologies and representations about those communities and languages . Such 
representations or  dominant discourses reach far greater circulation within 
broader publics , and may therefore disproportion ately shape both public 
opinion and policy. However, as sociolinguistic disjunctures, the differences 
highlighted in this ar ticle also have the ability to ‘ create opportunities for 
resetting patterns, for reschematizing some system of semiotic value, for 
transforming everyday communicative practices and expectations ’ (Meek 
2010 :51). A rhetoric of Indigenous language survivance, then, would focus on 
Indigenous languages as elements embedded in communities, histories, and 
spaces rather than extracted from the m. It would  recogn ise that language 
endangerment does not occur in sociopolitical vacuums, and that to present it 
as such may promote the assignment of responsibility for contemporary 
realities on those who often have the least agency . Finally, it would recogn ise 
that language realities are contained within entire groups associated wit h a 
given language or languages , not just those identified as particular types of 
speakers. This resetting of patterns may be supported by  asking new questions 
and reframing o ld stories in ways that demonstrate the full depth of the 
challenges facing Indigenous communities through recent years, decades, and 
centuries, while also highlighting the incredible extent of Indigenous language 
and cultural maintenance against all odds as a decolonial act of breath -taking 
resistance, resilience, and survivance.  Resisting rhetorics of language endangerment  55 
References  
Archuleta, Margaret L., Brenda J. Child, K. Tsianina Lomawaima & Heard 
Museum. 2000. Away from home: American Indian boarding school 
experiences, 1879 -2000.  Phoenix: He ard Museum.  
baird, jessie little doe. 2013. Wampanoag: How did this happen to my 
language? In Leanne Hinton (ed.) Bringing our languages home: 
Language revitalization for families , 19-32. Berkeley, CA: Heyday 
Books.  
Baldwin, Daryl, Karen Baldwin, Jessie Ba ldwin & Jarrid Baldwin. 2013. 
myaamiaataweenki oowaaha: ‘Miami spoken here’. In Leanne Hinton 
(ed.) Bringing our languages home: Language revitalization for 
families , 3-18. Berkeley, CA: Heyday Books.  
Briggs, Laura & Karen Dubinsky. 2013. Special issue int roduction: The 
politics of history and the history of politics. American Indian 
Quarterly 37(2), 129 -135. 
Crawford, James. 1995. Endangered Native American languages: What is to 
be done, and why? The Bilingual Research Journal . 19(1), 17 -38. 
Cobb, Amanda J . 2000. Listening to our grandmothers’ stories: The 
Bloomfield Academy for Chickasaw Females, 1852 -1949.  Lincoln: 
University of Nebraska Press.  
Cooper, James F. 1888. The last of the Mohicans . London: Ward, Lock 
and Co.  
Davies, Caroline. 2014. The People w ho want their language to disappear. 
BBC News November 2. http://www.bbc.com/news/magazine -
29804445. [Accessed 2015 -04-03]. 
Davis, Jenny L. 2016. Language affiliation and ethnolinguistic identity in 
Chickasaw language revitalization. Language & Communicati on 
47, 100-111. 
Deer, Sarah. 2015. The beginning and end of rape: Confronting sexual 
violence in Native America.  Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 
Press.  
De Korne, Haley. 2017. The multilingual realities of language reclamation: 
Working with language co ntact, diversity, and change in endangered 
language education. In Wesley Y. Leonard & Haley De Korne (eds.) 
Language Documentation and Description, vol 14 , 111-135. London: 
EL Publishing . 
Denison, Norman. 1977. Language death or language suicide? Internati onal 
Journal of the Sociology of Language  12, 13 -22. 
Diaz, Natalie. 2014. If what I mean is hummingbird, if what I mean is fall into 
my mouth.  Best American  Poetry  2016 . March  25. 
 http://blog.bestamericanpoetry.com/the_best_american_poetry/2014/03
/if-what -i-mean -is-hummingbird -if-what -i-mean -is-fall-into-my-
mouth.html. [Accessed 2014 -07-13]. 
Farnell, Brenda. 1995. Do you see what I mean?: Plains Indian Sign Talk and 
the embodiment of action . Austin: University of Texas Press.  Jenny L. Davis  56 
Ferguson, Jenanne. 2010. Shäwt hän Dän, Shäwthän Kwänjè: Good people, 
good words: Creating a Dän K'è speech community in an elementary 
school. Current Issues in Language Planning  11(2), 152 -172. 
Heizer, Robert F. & Theodora Kroeber (eds.) 1979. Ishi the last Yahi: A 
documentary history . Berkeley: University of California Press.  
Hermes, Mary & Mel M. Engman. 2017. Resounding the clarion call: 
Indigenous language learners and documentation. In Wesley Y. 
Leonard & Haley De Korne (eds.) Language Documentation and 
Description, vol 14 , 59-87. London: EL Publishing . 
Hershey, Barbara, Kurtwood Smith, Tom Berenger, Mario Kassar, Joel B. 
Michaels & Tab Murphy. 1995. Last of the Dogmen . New York: HBO 
Home Video.  
Hill, Jane H. 2002. ‘Expert rhetorics’ in advocacy for endangered languages: 
Who is list ening and what do they hear? Journal of Linguistic 
Anthropol ogy 12(2), 119 -133. 
Hornberger, Nancy H. 2017. Portraits of three language activists in 
Indigenous language reclamation. In Wesley Y. Leonard & Haley De 
Korne (eds.) Language Documentation and Des cription, vol 14 , 160-
175. London: EL Publishing . 
Irvine, Judith T. & Susan Gal. 2000. Language ideology and linguistic 
differentiation. In Paul V. Kroskrity (ed.) Regimes of language: 
Ideologies, polities, and identities , 35-83. Santa Fe, New Mexico: 
Scho ol of American Research Press.  
King, Kendall A. & Mary Hermes. 2014. Why is this so hard?: Ideologies of 
endangerment, passive language learning approaches, and Ojibwe in 
the United States. Journal of Language, Identity & Education 13(4), 
268-282. 
Kroskrit y, Paul V. (ed. ) 2012. Telling stories in the face of danger: Language 
renewal in Native American communities . Norman: University of 
Oklahoma Press.  
Last 2 speakers of dying language won’t speak to each other. 2011. The World 
Post/The  Huffington  Post. 14 April. http://www.huffingtonpost.com/20
11/04/14/ayapaneco -dying -languages_n_849319.html. [Accessed 
2014 -07-14]. 
Leonard, Wesley Y. 2008. When is an ‘extinct language’ not extinct? Miami, 
a formerly sleeping language. In Kendall A. King, Natalie Schilling -
Estes, Lyn Fogle, Jia Jackie Lou & Barbara Soukup (eds.) Sustaining 
linguistic diversity: Endangered and minority languages and language 
varieties , 23-33. Washington: Georgetown University Press.  
Leonard, Wesley Y. 2011. Challenging ‘extinction’ through mode rn Miami 
language practices. American Indian Culture and Research Journal  
35(2), 135 -160. 
Leonard, Wesley Y. 2017.  Producing language reclamation by decoloni sing 
‘language’.  In Wesley Y. Leonard & Haley De Korne (eds.) Language 
Documentation and Descriptio n, vol 14 , 15-36. London: EL 
Publishing.  Resisting rhetorics of language endangerment  57 
Leonard, Wesley Y. & Erin Haynes. 2010. Making ‘collaboration’ 
collaborative: An examination of perspectives that frame linguistic 
field research . Language Documentation & Conservation  4, 268 -293. 
Lomawaima, K. Tsia nina. 1994. They called it Prairie Light: The story of 
Chilocco Indian School.  Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.  
Lovgren, Stefan. 2007. Languages racing to extinction in 5 global ‘hotspots’. 
National  Geographic  News . 18 September. 
http://news.national geographic.com/news/2007/09/070918 -languages -
extinct.html. [Accessed 2016 -03-25]. 
Lukaniec, Megan. 2015. From archives to adult and child language learning: 
Reconstructing and revitalizing Wendat (Iroquoian). Paper given at the 
89th Annual Meeting of the L inguistic Society of America.  
Mbembe, Achille. 2003. Necropolitics. Public Culture  15(1), 11 -40. 
Meek, Barbra A. 2010. We are our language: An ethnography of language 
revitalization in a Northern Athabaskan community . Tucson: 
University of Arizona Press.  
Meek, Barbra A. 2011. Failing American Indian languages. American Indian 
Culture and Research Journal  35(2), 43 -60. 
Muehlmann, Shaylih. 2012. Von Humboldt’s parrot and the countdown of 
last speakers in the Colorado Delta. Language & Communication 
32(2), 160 -168. 
Nevins, M. Eleanor. 2013. Lessons from Fort Apache: Beyond language 
endangerment and maintenance . Chichester: Wiley -Blackwell.  
O’Brien, Jean M. 2010. Firsting and lasting: Writing Indians out of existence 
in New England . Minneapolis: University of Mi nnesota Press.  
Perley, Bernard C. 2012. Zombie linguistics: Experts, endangered 
languages and the curse of undead voices. Anthropological Forum 
22(2), 133 -149. 
Rivenburgh, Nancy K. 2013. Media framing of complex issues: The case of 
endangered languages. Public Understanding of Science (Bristol, 
England) 22(6), 704 -717. 
Sakiestewa Gilbert, Matthew. 2010. Education beyond the mesas: Hopi 
students at Sherman Institute, 1902 -1929 . Lincoln: University of 
Nebraska Press.  
Shulist, Sarah. 2016. Language revitalizat ion and the future of ethnolinguistic 
identity. Language & Communication 47, 94-99. 
Suslak, Daniel F. 2011. Ayapan echoes: Linguistic persistence and loss in 
Tabasco, Mexico. American Anthropologist 113(4), 569 -581. 
Than, Ker & Chris Rainier. 2012. See and  hear last speakers of dying 
languages. National  Geographic . 18 February.  
  http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2012/02/pictures/120217 -
talking -dictionaries -vanishing -languages -science -hear-audio/. 
[Accessed 2016 -01-27]. Jenny L. Davis  58 
Thurman, Judith. 2015. A loss f or words: Can a dying language be saved? The 
New Yorker . 30 March.  http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2015/03/
30/a-loss-for-words. [Accessed 2016 -02-16]. 
Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada. 2015. Final report of the 
Truth and Reconciliation Commi ssion of Canada.  Toronto: James 
Lorimer & Company Ltd., Publishers.  
UNESCO. 2003. Language vitality and endangerment. Paris: Document by 
UNESCO Ad Hoc Expert Group on Endangered Languages.  
Vaughan -Lee, Emmanu el. 2014. Who speaks Wukchumni?  New York Times . 
18 August.  http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/19/opinion/who -speaks -
wukchumni.html. [Accessed 2016 -02-16]. 
Vizenor, Gerald. 1999. Manifest manners: Narratives on Postindian 
survivance . Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.  
Vizenor, Gerald. 2008. Aesthetics of  survivance: Literary theory and practice. 
In Gerald Vizenor (ed.) Survivance: Narratives of Native presence , 1-
24. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.  
Wells, Herbert G. 1924. The works of H. G. Wells. III, The invisible man, The 
war of the worlds, A dr eam of Armageddon . London: T. Fisher Unwin.  
Whalen, Kevin. 2016. Native students at work: American Indian labor and 
Sherman Institute ’s outing program, 1900 -1945.  Seattle: University of 
Washington Press.  
 